---
date: "2019-06-27T00:00:00Z"
external_link: ""
featured: false
image:
  focal_point: Smart
links:
- icon: researchgate
  icon_pack: fab
  name: Follow
  url: https://www.researchgate.net/project/Meritocratic-beliefs-in-the-Chinese-educational-system
#slides: example
summary: This study is aimed to test the legitimiation and motivation hypotheses of culture simultaneously in the case of the Chinese educational system regarding meritocratic beliefs. How do parents’ meritocratic beliefs and children’s educational performance are affected by each other? 
tags:
- Papers
title: The Myth of Hard Work
subtitle: A Dual-Process of Parental Meritocratic Beliefs in China?
url_code: ""
url_pdf: ""
url_slides: ""
url_video: ""
---

In modern societies, meritocracy is a principle which provides the basis for reward allocation based on achievement rather than ascription (Mijs 2016b; Tsay et al. 2003; Young 1958). Defenders of meritocratic ideals (Herrnstein and Murray 1996; Saunders 1995) indicate that it serves to two purposes: first, enables to allocate efficiently scarce resources and, second, incentivizes effort. However, unequal and underserved starting positions lead to the understanding that meritocracy violates its own merit principle. It legitimates societal inequalities as justly deserved, and misfortune becomes a personal failure (Mijs 2016b). However, the cross-national and comparative efforts of legitimization researcher have not come along with longitudinal evidence to rule out bidirectional effects (Mijs 2016a, 2019). Either way, those competing perspective could apply to different experiences of social mobility, professional career, educational achievement or any sort of success. In this context, **this study is aimed to test these two perspectives simultaneously in the case of the Chinese educational system: How do parents’ meritocratic beliefs and children’s educational performance are affected by each other?** We focus on the educational system because it is the most important mechanism of stratification in post-industrial societies (Bell 1999). By understanding the role of parental meritocratic beliefs in the educational system we closely examine how meritocratic beliefs shape and are shaped by success in society. Although China could not be classified as a post-industrial country, since 2012 the share of the tertiary sector overtook the secondary sector as the most important economic sector (National Bureau of Statistics 2012). Therefore, meritocratic beliefs are examined in a juncture of industrial transition. 

**This question arises classical discussions in sociology of culture regarding the relationship between culture and action** (Frye 2012; Schwarz 2018; Vaisey 2009). However, as Vaisey and Valentino (2018) diagnose, beliefs are usually sidelined by cultural sociologists. Indeed, meritocratic beliefs could be understood as narratives if we applied the operationalization of culture provided by Small, Harding and Lamont (2010). Narratives are “causally linked sequence of events in people’s minds”  (Small et al. 2010:16) and the classical definition of meritocracy is where success is predicted by non-ascriptive characteristics such as effort, intelligence, and non-cognitive skills. Therefore, parental beliefs about meritocracy are narratives of how rewards are allocated in society. Hence, by discussing the reciprocal effects of parental beliefs and educational outcomes we engage in a broader discussion about culture and action literature. 
This article makes several contributions to the literature. First, **we test simultaneously two competing hypotheses about the role of meritocratic beliefs in the educational system**. It is enabled by a theoretical rationale and rich longitudinal data. Understanding meritocratic beliefs as narratives, a dual-process model of culture (Vaisey 2009; Vaisey and Lizardo 2010) is applied to derive reciprocal effects hypotheses. Moreover, the two waves of the China Educational Panel Survey allows using autoregressive cross-lagged structural models for disentangling the theorized reciprocal effects.

Second, **the Chinese case is a unique setting for studying meritocratic beliefs**. Paradoxically, there is no equivalent word to meritocracy in Chinese. It is often translated as elitism (英才教育), which ignore its antecedents. However, Chinese culture has longstanding meritocratic principles in western terms, grounded on the Confucian philosophy. It bonds educational institutions and examination to qualifications for highly-valued civil service jobs (Hannum et al. 2019). Folk tales of hard work, such as Kuang Heng’s story, illustrates how meritocratic beliefs have permeated Chinese society. He was a poor kid who lived during the Han dynasty. His family could not afford candles for studying at night. Because of his commitment to become a civil servant, he used light coming from his neighbors’ houses. Thus, through hard work, he reached the position of emperor’s hand. In addition, a recent study has shown (Mijs 2019) that countries with higher inequality tend to explain success in meritocratic terms. In the case of China, rapid economic development and social inequality bring the justificatory role of meritocratic narratives, alongside his hypothesized motivational effect, into sharper relief.

Finally, **this study specifies differences between attributional beliefs regarding skills and hard work**. Critics of the role of meritocracy argue that meritocratic beliefs contradict themselves. People have different starting points, and through meritocratic principles, they are signified as deserved (Mijs 2016b). A large body of evidence using twins’ studies has shown that family and genetic endowments affect cognitive and non-cognitive skills (Daw, Guo, and Harris 2015; Felson 2014; Nielsen 2006; Pokropek and Sikora 2015; Teachman 1997). Taken together, this literature suggests that family nurtures the development of skills. Nevertheless, nobody chooses the family where one is born into. Indeed, most of these studies are built upon the strong assumption that there is no assortative mating, which ultimately may affect genetic endowments. Henceforth, we could critically examine meritocratic beliefs independently. Thus, this study seeks to explore the consistency of both components of meritocracy -skills and hard work- and their potential heterogeneous relationships with academic performance.

